# NASA Earth Exchange Global Daily Downscaled Projections (NEX-GDDP) Data
This file describes the analysis done by the Resource Watch team for Facebook to be used in displaying projected change in climate indicators in their newly launched [Climate Science Center](https://www.facebook.com/climatescienceinfo/). 

Check out the Climate Science Center (CSC) for up-to-date information on climate data in your area from trusted sources. And go to [Resource Watch](https://resourcewatch.org/) to explore over 300 datasets covering topics from food, forests, water, oceans, cities, energy, climate, and society. This analysis was originally performed by [Avra Saslow](https://www.wri.org/profile/avra-saslow) and was QC'd by [Kristine Lister](https://www.wri.org/profile/kristine-lister).

## Data Sources
This analysis was done using the data from the [NASA Earth Exchange Global Daily Downscaled Projections (NEX-GDDP) dataset](https://www.nccs.nasa.gov/services/data-collections/land-based-products/nex-gddp), The NEX-GDDP datasets provides meaningful projected climate indicators under different greenhouse gas scenarios. The greenhouse gase scenarios were derived from Global Circulation Model (GCM) experiments that were produced for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Fifth Assessment Report (AR5). These experiments, known as the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project phase 5 (CMIP5) included results from climate models designed to simulate climate under different levels of greenhouse gas concentrations. CMIP5 data include a large number of models (45), climate scenarios (4), years (150+), and variables (20-40). The NEX-GDDP dataset condenses this data into projections of useful climate indicators in a common geospatial format, geotiff, at a spatial resolution of 0.25°.

The NEX-GDDP dataset is intended to assist the scientific community in conducting studies of climate change impacts at local to regional scales, and to enhance public understanding of possible future global climate patterns at the spatial scale of individual towns, cities, and watersheds. 

For this analysis, we show the projected change in climate indicators for one scenario, where greenhouse gas emission rates determined by the IPCC’s Representative Concentration Pathways (RCP) 8.5. RCP 8.5 is a hypothetical scenario where there is no decrease in greenhouse gas emission rates within the 21st century, sometimes refered to as the "business as usual" scenario.

The NEX-GDDP dataset shows the change in each climate indicator at ten year intervals between 2000 and 2080, compared to a baseline time period of 1960-1990. The data shown at each ten year interval represents a 31-year average, centered around the indicated year. For example, the average temperature in 2000 is actually an average of the temperature between the years 1985 and 2015.

This analysis calculates the average value of each climate indicator in ten year intervals between 2000 and 2080 at the state and country level. The administrative global area is from [GADM](https://gadm.org/). 

### Indicators
#### [Projected Change in Extreme Heat Days](https://resourcewatch.org/data/explore/3941bbba-181b-434a-84c3-fcdfa5234735)
The Projected Change in Extreme Heat Days dataset provides projections on how temperature patterns are likely to change in the coming decades. In particular, an increased quantity of extreme heat days can lead to human and ecosystem threats caused by more frequent, more intense, and longer heat waves. Heat-related illnesses can occur when a person is exposed to high temperatures, such that their body cannot cool itself sufficiently through sweating. When people are exposed to extreme heat, they can suffer from potentially deadly illnesses, such as heat exhaustion and heat stroke. Hot temperatures can also contribute to deaths from heart attacks, strokes, and other forms of cardiovascular disease. Temperature extremes can also worsen chronic conditions such as cardiovascular disease, respiratory disease, cerebrovascular disease, and diabetes-related conditions. Prolonged exposure to high temperatures is associated with increased hospital admissions for cardiovascular, kidney, and respiratory disorders. In addition, prolonged exposure to excessive heat and cold can damage crops and injure or kill livestock. Extreme heat can lead to power outages as heavy demands for air conditioning strain the power grid, while extremely cold weather increases the need for heating fuel.

The average number of extreme heat days for each year calculated by extracting the daily maximum temperature values for a given year and summing the number of days where the maximum temperature was greater than the 99th percentile temperature during the baseline period. The number of extreme heat days were combined into 31-year averages for the baseline time period of 1960-1990 and nine periods centered on the start of each decade from 2000 to 2080. The baseline average was then subtracted from each of the nine projected decades to create the projected change in extreme heat days. Positive values indicate that the number of extreme heat days is increasing, while negative values indicate that the number is decreasing.

#### [Projected Change in Annual Average Temperature](https://resourcewatch.org/data/explore/4ca6826c-718d-457d-b4e2-e9277d7ed62c)
The annual average temperature for each year was calculated by extracting and averaging all daily temperature data over a given year. The annual average temperatures were then combined into 31-year averages for the baseline time period of 1960-1990 and nine periods centered on the start of each decade from 2000 to 2080. The baseline average was then subtracted from each of the nine projected decades to create the projected change in annual average temperature.

#### [Projected Change in Annual Average Maximum Temperature](https://resourcewatch.org/data/explore/c4b12251-2d61-458f-a2c0-096c37901ade)
The annual average maximum temperature for each year was calculated by extracting by averaging all daily maximum temperature data over a given year. The average annual maximum temperatures were then combined into 31-year averages for the baseline time period of 1960-1990 and nine periods centered on the start of each decade from 2000 to 2080. The baseline average was then subtracted from each of the nine projected decades to create the projected change in annual average maximum temperature.

#### [Projected Change in Annual Average Minimum Temperature](https://resourcewatch.org/data/explore/3d8e2e82-b33a-4898-90e5-6e4a1d007b82)
In many places the annual average minimum temperature is projected to increase. The daily minimum temperature usually occurs at nighttime, and this ​​change will provide [less opportunity to cool off and recover from daytime heat](https://www.epa.gov/climate-indicators/climate-change-indicators-high-and-low-temperatures). An increase in minimum temperature would also lead to a decrease in the number of days with temperature below freezing. Freezing temperatures also help [reduce populations of certain insects and other pests](https://www.epa.gov/climate-indicators/climate-change-indicators-freeze-thaw-conditions) that can damage crops and forests or spread diseases to humans; conversely, a mild winter with fewer days of frost can lead to more of these pests during the following spring and summer. Frozen temperatures also allow precipitation to fall as snow rather than rain, which is important for regional water supplies. 

The annual average minimum temperature for each year was calculated by extracting and averaging all daily minimum temperature data over a given year. The average annual minimum temperatures were combined into 31-year averages for the baseline time period of 1960-1990 and nine periods centered on the start of each decade from 2000 to 2080. The baseline average was then subtracted from each of the nine projected decades to create the projected change in annual average minimum temperature.

#### [Projected Change in Dry Spells](https://resourcewatch.org/data/explore/d0f46576-411d-48aa-8df8-d89a3792cdce)
Meteorologists generally define drought as a [prolonged period of dry weather](https://www.epa.gov/climate-indicators/climate-change-indicators-drought) caused by a lack of precipitation that results in a serious water shortage for some activity, population, or ecological system. Drought conditions can negatively affect agriculture, water supplies, energy production, human health, and many other aspects of society. The impacts vary depending on the type, location, intensity, and duration of the drought. For example, effects on agriculture can range from slowed plant growth to severe crop losses, while water supply impacts can range from lowered reservoir levels and dried-up streams to major water shortages. Prolonged droughts pose a particular threat to indigenous populations because of their economic and cultural dependence on land and water supplies. Warming and drought can threaten medicinal and culturally important plants and animals and can reduce water quality and availability, making tribal populations particularly vulnerable to waterborne illnesses.  Lower streamflow and groundwater levels can also harm ecosystems more broadly, by harming plants and animals and increasing the risk of wildfires

The average annual number of dry spells for each yearwas caclulated by extracting precipitation data for a given year and summing the number of 5-day periods with less than 1 mm of precipitation. If a dry period lasted longer than 5 days, each additional day without precipitation was counted as a fractional (1/5) dry period. For example, a dry period of 8 days would count as 8/5 of a dry period (1 + 3/5). The average annual number of dry spells were combined into 31-year averages for the baseline time period of 1960-1990 and nine periods centered on the start of each decade from 2000 to 2080. Then each of the nine projected decades were divided by the baseline average to calculate the projected change in dry spells. Values greater than 1 indicate that the number of dry spells is increasing, while values less than one indicate that the number is decreasing.

#### [Projected Change in Frost Free Season](https://resourcewatch.org/data/explore/d3f512c0-fbb0-47d5-9ac9-a452574c8e58)
The freezing point (32°F, 0°C) is a critical temperature threshold for many aspects of life. An increase in the average frost free season means that there are less days with temperatures below the freezing point. The number of days with temperatures below freezing, and when these days occur, can affect [natural ecosystems as well as many sectors of the economy](https://www.epa.gov/climate-indicators/climate-change-indicators-freeze-thaw-conditions). For example, many crops only grow during periods when they are not limited by frost damage. The number of frozen days during a year determines which naturally occurring plants can thrive, what food sources are available for animals, and when and how animals migrate or hibernate. Freezing temperatures also help reduce populations of certain insects and other pests that can damage crops and forests or spread diseases to humans; conversely, a mild winter with fewer days of frost can lead to more of these pests during the following spring and summer. Frozen temperatures also allow precipitation to fall as snow rather than rain, which is important for regional water supplies.

The annual average frost free season for each year was calculated by extracting daily minimum temperature values for a given year and finding the largest number of consecutive days where the minimum temperature exceeded 32°F. The average annual frost free seasons were combined into 31-year averages for the baseline time period of 1960-1990 and nine periods centered on the start of each decade from 2000 to 2080. Then the baseline average was subtracted from each of the nine projected decades to create the projected change in dry spells
 
#### [Projected Change in Cumulative Precipitation](https://resourcewatch.org/data/explore/faf79d2c-5e54-4591-9d70-4bd1029c18e6)
Precipitation can have [wide-ranging effects on human well-being and ecosystems](https://www.epa.gov/climate-indicators/climate-change-indicators-us-and-global-precipitation). Rainfall, snowfall, and the timing of snowmelt can all affect the amount of surface water and groundwater available for drinking, irrigation, and industry. They also influence river flooding and can determine what types of animals and plants (including crops) can survive in a particular place. Changes in precipitation can disrupt a wide range of natural processes, particularly if these changes occur more quickly than plant and animal species can adapt. Precipitation changes are projected to be more varied across the world, generally showing increases in mean precipitation in high-latitude regions and a pole-ward shift of subtropical arid regions. In addition, precipitation is projected to occur in fewer, but more intense events. Except in the few areas that are projected to see substantial drying, historically extreme precipitation events are expected to become more frequent worldwide. Even as precipitation increases, dry periods are projected to increase in length and frequency.

The cumulative precipitation for each year was calculated by adding all daily precipitation data over a given year. The cumulative precipitations were then combined into 31-year averages for the baseline time period of 1960-1990 and nine periods centered on the start of each decade from 2000 to 2080. Then each of the nine projected decades were divided by the baseline average to calculate the projected change in cumulative precipitation. Values greater than 1 indicate that cumulative precipitation is increasing, while values less than one indicate that cumulative precipitation is decreasing.

#### [Projected Change in Extreme Precipitation Days](https://resourcewatch.org/data/explore/66d28bbc-1e6e-4156-9ba2-875ecab665af)
The Projected Change in Extreme Precipitation Days dataset provides projections on how extreme precipitation patterns are likely to change in the coming decades. Generally, extreme precipitation events are expected to become more frequent worldwide. The potential impacts of extreme precipitation includes an [increase in flood risk](https://www.epa.gov/climate-indicators/climate-change-indicators-heavy-precipitation#ref2), which can lead to injuries, drownings, and damage to infrastructure such as homes, hospitals, roads, and public transportation. [Flooding can also impact water quality](https://www.epa.gov/climate-indicators/climate-change-indicators-river-flooding), where water treatment centers can be contaminated with sediments and wastewater, promoting the growth of harmful microbes.

The annual average extreme precipitation days for each year was calculated by extracting the daily precipitation values for a given year and summing the number of days where precipitation was greater than the 99th percentile precipitation during the baseline period. The annual average extreme precipitation days were combined into 31-year averages for the baseline time period of 1960-1990 and nine periods centered on the start of each decade from 2000 to 2080. Then each of the nine projected decades were divided by the baseline average to calculate the projected change in extreme precipitation. Values greater than 1 indicate that extreme precipitation is increasing, while values less than one indicate that the number is decreasing.

## Methods
This analysis calculates the average value of each climate indicator over the state and country level for each of the nine periods centered on the start of each decade from 2000 to 2080. The average value for each state and country was calculated using the [rasterstats](https://pythonhosted.org/rasterstats/) Python module.

1. Download NEX-GDDP zipfile package from one of the datasets on [Resource Watch](https://resourcewatch.org/data/explore/cli050a-Projected-Average-Temperature) using the "Download" button.
2. Download global administrative boundaries at different levels from [GADM](https://gadm.org/).
3. Loop through climate indicators.
4. Loop through years.
5. Save average value of the raster over the state/country regions.
6. Export the results as a CSV file.

## Final Data
The final data can be viewed in the data directory.

## References
- Gassert, F., E. Cornejo, and E. Nilson. 2021. “Making Climate Data Accessible: Methods for Producing NEX-GDDP and LOCA Downscaled Climate Indicators” Technical Note. Washington, DC: World Resources Institute. Available online at https://www.wri.org/research/making-climate-data-accessible. www.resourcewatch.org.

- Global Administrative Areas (2021). GADM database of Global Administrative Areas, version 3.6. \[online\] URL: [www.gadm.org](www.gadm.org).
